ame-next ENGINE SPEC
File: text.txt - text rendering

GOAL
Real, good-looking text rendering that works in both the desktop and
web builds from one C implementation, feeds the same batch renderer
as sprites (render.txt), and is crisp at any size or rotation.
Serves UI, HUD, and the dialogue typewriter (dialogue.txt).

WHY THIS IS HARD / WHAT BROKE BEFORE
  - attempt 1's engine shipped a "stroke font" (stb_easy_font):
    ugly, no antialiasing. The game had to hack around it by
    rasterizing each string with SDL_ttf into a texture every time
    text changed.
  - attempt 2 had no text at all.
  - The single-header font libs were also a compile problem
    (include/OOM pain, fragile in a mixed C/C++ tree). "Good" here
    must mean: the engine's own text module compiles clean with
    warnings-as-errors and is included from exactly one place; any
    vendored rasterizer lives in third_party/ and is exempt from
    -Werror (build.txt rule 3).

DECISIONS (from the requirements)
  1. V0 RENDERS TEXT FROM A FONT-TO-TEXTURE GLYPH ATLAS (rasterized
     glyphs baked into an atlas texture), drawn as textured quads.
     This is the v0 baseline: simple, reliable, works in one pass.
     Reason: signed-distance-field text (esp. DSDF, a separate pass
     for multi-channel SDF edge) is more complex to implement. DSDF
     may need its OWN pass, so it is NOT the v0 path.
  2. Text becomes MESH geometry. Each glyph quad (from the atlas
     texture) is tessellated using per-glyph metrics; glyph quads are
     packed into the shared sprite/mesh batch alongside everything
     else, so text stays in the SAME single pass/batch where possible
     (render.txt rule 5, ui.txt). This mesh design is what lets text
     work in 2D AND 3D from one code path: each glyph quad is placed
     by a pose (a 2D x/y or a 3D position + orientation), so the same
     layout feeds both.
  3. DSDF IS OPTIONAL, decided LATER by implementation quality.
     Do not commit DSDF to v0. Whether the engine ever uses DSDF
     (instead of or to augment the atlas) depends on how well an LLM
     agent implements its multi-channel pass. Rule: ship the atlas at
     v0; only add DSDF if/when a clean implementation exists and is
     tested. If a separate DSDF pass is needed, that is acceptable but
     it is a LATER rendering decision (render.txt / ui.txt), not part
     of the v0 single-pass baseline.
  4. The atlas + glyph data can be built EITHER at startup OR at
     build time. Prefer BUILD TIME: a host tool rasterizes the font
     once and emits plain C arrays (atlas pixels + glyph metric
     table) baked into the binary. Deterministic, zero startup cost,
     identical on native and web. A startup path is an allowed
     fallback for fonts not known until runtime.
  5. The baking/rasterizer tool may be written in a language with
     compile-time power (a C++ constexpr generator, or a small
     Python tool) because that simplifies generating the tables.
     What matters is the OUTPUT: plain C data arrays the C23 engine
     reads. The in-engine side stays C23; if a runtime rasterizer is
     ever needed in-engine, it lives in the single allowed C++ shim.
     This host tool is BUILD-TIME ONLY - it is never linked into the
     engine.

FONT SOURCE
  - Bundle the font bytes as data (the project already has a font,
    e.g. Pixelify). For pixel-art 2D, enable nearest/point sampling
    and integer glyph sizes. In 3D use a softer bilinear sampling;
    this is a sampling/filter choice at draw, not a separate font.
    (If DSDF is adopted later, its shader-based edge replaces the
    texture-filter crispness - decision 3.)
  - Unicode: UTF-8 input. The atlas covers the needed codepoint
    ranges (latin, latin-ext, cyrillic, plus a fallback). A missing
    glyph renders as a visible fallback box, never a crash.

WHERE TEXT LIVES (2D and 3D)
  Text can be placed in three ways from one layout engine:
    - SCREEN/UI text: stays in front, in the UI layer. Used by HUD
      and dialogue boxes.
    - WORLD labels: placed at a world point/pose. In 3D, BILLBOARD
      mode keeps the glyph plane facing the camera so text is always
      readable (name tags, floating hints). In 3D, PLANAR mode lays
      the text flat on a surface (wall signs, decals) via its pose.
    - In 2D, world labels are just text at a world x/y, same as any
      in-scene mesh (ui.txt says UI is in-scene meshes).
  The layout math is identical for all; only the pose differs. Keep
  the billboard "face camera" and planar "apply orientation" as two
  pose helpers, not as separate text systems.

TEXT PIPELINE (order)
  decode utf-8 -> runs (inline styles) -> layout (wrap/align) ->
  glyph list (index + position, with kerning) -> submit glyph quads
  to the batch.

FEATURES REQUIRED IN V0 (full scope was requested)
  - Word wrap to a box width.
  - Horizontal alignment: left, center, right. Vertical: top, center.
  - Per-string color tint and scale.
  - Inline rich tags in the string for runs, for example a color,
    a size change, and a pause used by the typewriter:
        {c=FFD700}gold{/c}, pause {p=0.5}
    The exact tag set is defined by the layout parser; it must be
    small, plain, and case-insensitive.
  - UTF-8 / Unicode text (not limited to ASCII).
  - Typewriter reveal for dialogue: the layout yields an ordered
    glyph list, and a reveal amount 0..1 (or a glyph index) hides
    glyphs beyond it so the UI can type out text over time.

API SHAPE (text.h, extern "C")
  Layout and drawing are two steps so the UI can measure before it
  draws (needed for centering and dialogue boxes).

    text_init()                 load baked atlas + metrics into GL
    glyph info lookup per codepoint

    measure(text, box_w) -> width, height, glyph count   (no draw)
    layout(text, box_w, align) -> an array of positioned glyphs
    draw_ui(layout, x, y, scale, tint)      // screen/UI position
    draw_world(layout, pose, scale, tint)   // world pose; billboard
                                            // or planar via pose mode
    reveal controls feed draw a hidden-glyph count for typewriter.

  The text module knows nothing about gameplay; it just places
  glyphs. The dialogue UI (a gameplay concern) owns a text box, a
  box width, an alignment, and a typewriter timer.

QUALITY BAR
  - Text is crisp at integer and, where possible, at non-integer scale
    and rotation from the atlas (bilinear/trilinear filtering), not
    the blurry per-string-raster problem of the past.
  - Thin strokes in small sizes do not vanish. The v0 atlas handles
    common cases; if very small/colored-thin glyphs need a crisper
    edge, that is the moment DSDF is reconsidered (decision 3) - it
    is optional, not required at v0.
  - Deterministic: the same string + font + settings lays out the
    same on native and web (byte-identical glyph positions).

COMPILE / TEST REQUIREMENTS (fixes the past problems)
  - The font code is included from exactly ONE translation unit.
    No fragile single-header that is force-included or doubled.
  - Warnings-as-errors in CI on the whole tree including this module.
  - A test renders a known string and compares glyph count,
    positions, and width against a golden expected value.
  - A headless layout test needs no GL (layout is pure CPU); only
    the final draw needs GL. Keep layout and draw separable so text
    logic is unit-testable without a window.

BANNED
  - The old per-string-texture approach (rasterize every change).
  - A separate 2D text and 3D text system (one mesh/layout engine).
  - Depending on DSDF/SDF as a v0 requirement (atlas is v0; DSDF is an
    optional later upgrade, decision 3 - do not let a fragile SDF
    implementation block shipping text).
  - Depending on a font lib that must be force-included or that
    breaks the build; any vendored rasterizer is used from one TU
    and compile-tested.
  - A separate text renderer for web (same C, shared by Emscripten).
  - Blocking font work in the audio callback or per frame.
  - Any allocation per frame in the layout/draw hot path.

CHECK
  A UI example draws a wrapped, centered, colored line and a
  Cyrillic line; both are crisp at 1x and 3x and when rotated.
  The dialogue box types out with a typewriter reveal.
  Layout tests pass headlessly; compile is clean with
  warnings-as-errors; native and web match.
